---
layout: post
title: Exploring Isomorphic JavaScript
---

*This is the result of a first exploration of "Isomorphic JavaScript", apps that run both on the server and in the browser. In this article I try to focus on the concepts and the problems that need to be solved, and towards the end I briefly cover an example implementation using Yahoo's Fluxible libraries and React Router.*

Isomorphic JavaScript applications (you'll also hear the terms "Server-Side Rendering" or ["Progressive JavaScript"](https://medium.com/the-thinkmill/making-the-case-for-progressive-javascript-a98dfa82b9d7)) is something we hear and read quite a bit about lately. Node.js made it possible, [Airbnb blogged about it in 2013](http://nerds.airbnb.com/weve-launched-our-first-nodejs-app-to-product), [React renders HTML on the server](http://facebook.github.io/react/docs/top-level-api.html#react.rendertostring), [Ember.js is working on "FastBoot"](http://emberjs.com/blog/2014/12/22/inside-fastboot-the-road-to-server-side-rendering.html), [Andres Suarez from SoundCloud](https://vimeo.com/108488724) and [Michael Ridgway from Yahoo](https://speakerdeck.com/mridgway/isomorphic-flux) did talks on the subject, etc. I decided to dig in and see what it was all about, what kind of problems it made you encounter, and possible ways to solve them.

I found that it is still a young idea, and I expect the patterns and available libraries (ex: [Fluxible](https://github.com/yahoo/fluxible), [React Router](https://github.com/rackt/react-router), [Nexus React](https://github.com/elierotenberg/react-nexus), [Taunus](https://github.com/taunus/taunus), etc.) to evolve quite a bit in the future. This is one reason why, for a good part of this post, I'll try to stay away from any specific implementation or framework, and focus more on the general concepts and problems to be solved (although of course, you might recognize the influence of certain libraries if you've used them). At the end, I will look at how these ideas translate in a more practical implementation, using Yahoo's Fluxible and React Router. I assume basic knowledge in [Express](http://expressjs.com/), [React](http://facebook.github.io/react/), and [Flux](http://facebook.github.io/flux/), but even if you've never used them, you should be able to follow along.

## Simplest example

At the most basic level, an isomorphic app should be able to render both on the server (in Node.js) and in the browser. React does this perfectly well, and other libraries too I'm sure.

```javascript
// server.js
var server = express();

server.use(function(req, res) {
  var appHtml = React.renderToString(<App />);
  var html = injectIntoHtml({app: appHtml});
  res.send(html);
});
```

```javascript
// client.js
React.render(<App />, document.getElementById('app'));
```

The only "tricky" bit here, is for the client to **pick up where the server left off**. That is, after the app is loaded in the browser, the first render doesn't "destroy" the DOM generated by the server, but rather "hooks" on to it. This is something that React, with its Virtual DOM implementation, does for you and you don't have to worry about it.

## Sharing state

Let's say the app renders a set of data fetched from a remote API (pretty common scenario). This data is part of the app's "state" (the data can take different values over time, and the app will render differently). Since we need to create this `state` on the server, it is probably a good idea to share it with the client, so it can pick up where the server left off (instead of re-creating and re-fetching the data, work already done).

```javascript
// server.js
server.use(function(req, res) {
  var state = {};
  fetchData(function(err, data) {
    state.data = data;
    var exposedState = 'window.__STATE__=' + JSON.stringify(state) + ';';
    var appHtml = React.renderToString(<App data={data} />);
    var html = injectIntoHtml({
      app: appHtml,
      state: exposedState
    });
    res.send(html);
  });
});
```

```javascript
// client.js
var state = window.__STATE__;
React.render(<App data={state.data} />, document.getElementById('app'));
```

We see the need to be able to **serialize** all of the state on the server, and then **parse and instanciate** it on the client (you'll hear the terms **dehydrate** and **rehydrate**). This allows us to initialize the app on the client in the exact same state it was on the server before being sending the HTML back.

Also note that on the **server** the app state is **bound to each request**, i.e. there is one state per request (since the server is serving multiple clients). On the **client**, the app state is **global**, i.e. we only need one state for the whole browser session.

## Simple routing

Most apps render according to different possible routes in the URL. Let's assume our top-level `<App>` React component takes a `route` object as a prop and renders accordingly.

On the **server**, we can simply get the route by matching the **request URL** against our "routes declaration" (not shown here):

```javascript
// server.js
server.use(function(req, res) {
  var route = matchPath(req.url);
  var appHtml = React.renderToString(<App route={route} />);
  var html = injectIntoHtml({app: appHtml});
  res.send(html);
});
```

On the **client**, we use the path from the **browser's URL location API** to match a route (implementation not shown here):

```javascript
// client.js
function render(route) {
  React.render(<App route={route} />, document.getElementById('app'));
}

// first render
var route = matchPath(getCurrentPath());
render(route);
// re-render on browser location change
addLocationChangeListener(function(path) {
  var route = matchPath(path);
  render(route);
});
```

Since subsequent route changes will happen on the client, we **listen to browser URL location changes**, and re-render the new route.

## Shared state and routing

Let's combine the previous two examples. On the server, we match the `route` and attach it to the app `state` (this makes sense since the route can take different values, each producing different rendering outputs). We then fetch the required data, render the app, and send the HTML back.

```javascript
// server.js
server.use(function(req, res) {
  var state = {};
  var route = matchPath(req.url);
  state.route = route;

  fetchData(route, function(err, data) {
    state.data = data;
    var exposedState = 'window.__STATE__=' + JSON.stringify(state) + ';';
    var appHtml = React.renderToString(<App route={route} data={data} />);
    var html = injectIntoHtml({
      app: appHtml,
      state: exposedState
    });
    res.send(html);
  });
});
```

Note that the `fetchData` function takes the `route` as an argument. Indeed, the **data needed by the app will probably depend on the route** (ex: for `/contacts` fetch the list of contacts, for `/contact/1/messages` fetch the contact's details and messages). 

(This means that we declare our "data-fetching needs" at the route-level (in the "routes declaration"), which might not be the best place in terms of modularity, but we'll see later that some libraries make it possible to declare it at the component-level.)

On the client, we follow the same logic:

```javascript
// client.js
var state = window.__STATE__;

function render() {
  React.render(
    <App route={state.route} data={state.data} />,
    document.getElementById('app')
  );
}

// first render
render();
// re-render on browser location change
addLocationChangeListener(function(path) {
  var route = matchPath(path);
  state.route = route;

  fetchData(route, function(err, data) {
    merge(state.data, data);
    render();
  });
});
```

Note that for the **first render we don't need to fetch data** (since it was already sent by the server), but for subsequent route changes and re-renders we need to fetch the necessary data.

However, we can improve the logic of the latter. Indeed, we wait for the data fetching to finish before actually rendering the route change. While this was necessary on the server, on the client we can **render the route change immediately**, fetch the data in the background, and re-render when it comes back (maybe showing a loading spinner in the meantime):

```javascript
// client.js
// ...
addLocationChangeListener(function(path) {
  var route = matchPath(path);
  state.route = route;
  // render immediately with no/old data (can show a loading spinner)
  render();

  // fetch data in the background then re-render
  fetchData(route, function(err, data) {
    merge(state.data, data);
    render();
  });
});
```

## Authentication

Most apps have some sort of authentication logic, protecting access to certain routes and redirecting to a sign-in screen when needed. How would that work with isomorphism?

If authentication is persisted from one browser session to the next, as is often the case, then **cookies are the shared persistence layer** between client and server (both have access to them, at least to read their value). If we use an auth token to acccess the remote data API, we can store that auth token in a cookie (this is not a post on security, so make sure you do your due-diligence regarding setting expiration dates, having a revoke mechanism, using SSL, etc.).

Being authenticated or not is also part the the app's `state`. We can create a helper function:

```javascript
// isAuthenticated.js
function isAuthenticated(state) {
  return Boolean(state.authToken);
}
```

Now, on the server-side, for each request we first read the value of the cookie, and **check if the auth token is valid**. If it is not valid and we are trying to access a protected route, we **redirect to the sign-in page**. In the other case, we proceed with fetching the data for that route and rendering.

```javascript
// server.js
server.use(function(req, res) {
  var state = {};
  var authToken = getCookie('authToken');
  checkSession(authToken, function(err, isValidToken) {
    if (isValidToken) {
      state.authToken = authToken;
    } else {
      clearCookie('authToken');
      state.authToken = null;
    }
    var route = matchPath(req.url);
    if (isAuthRequiredForRoute(route) && !isAuthenticated(state)) {
      res.redirect(303, signInPath());
      return;
    }
    state.route = route;
    // fetch data, render app, expose state, send html...
  });
});
```

On the client, the first render already has the authentication check done by the server, and the auth token was already loaded from the cookie into the serialized state. However, for each route change happening on the client we need to perform the check "is this route protected and are we authenticated" again, and redirect appropriately. "Redirecting" on the client is a bit different then on the server, since it means **replacing the browser's URL location** (which will trigger a location change, and thus a route change).

```javascript
// client.js
// grab server state, first render... then:
addLocationChangeListener(function(path) {
  var route = matchPath(path);
  if (isAuthRequiredForRoute(route) && !isAuthenticated(state)) {
    replaceLocation(signInPath());
    return;
  }
  state.route = route;
  render();
  // fetch data, update state, render...
});
```

## Configuration

Using configuration values is also a common pattern for apps. For instance, you might set `API_HOST` to point to different environments (development, staging, production) of the remote API.

```javascript
// config.js
var config = {
  API_HOST: process.env.API_HOST || 'http://localhost:3000/api'
};
```

```javascript
// server.js
var config = require('./config');
api.useConfig(config);
```

On the server, we can get config values from **environement variables** (or a local text file, probably not checked in the source code). That's not possible on the client however.

We'd like to share the `config` values with the client, just like we share the app `state` (for security purposes, you might want to filter some config values like API secrets before sending it to the client). We'll keep it separate, because unlike the app state, config isn't suppose to change during the app's lifecycle. We also intialize services (for example the `api` client) with the config values when the server starts and it's shared accross requests, whereas the app state is created on every request. The "serialize, parse & instanciate" mechanism between server and client stays the same.

```javascript
// server.js
var config = require('./config');
api.useConfig(config);

server.use(function(req, res) {
  var state = {};
  // check session, get route, fetch data... then:
  var exposedConfig = 'window.__CONFIG__=' + JSON.stringify(config) + ';';
  var exposedState = 'window.__STATE__=' + JSON.stringify(state) + ';';
  var appHtml = React.renderToString(<App route={route} data={data} />);
  var html = injectIntoHtml({
    app: appHtml,
    config: exposedConfig,
    state: exposedState
  });
  res.send(html);
});
```

```javascript
// client.js
var config = window.__CONFIG__;
var state = window.__STATE__;

api.useConfig(config);
// first render, add location change listener...
```

## Disabling isomorphism

If isomorphism means the app can run on both the server and the browser, we should be able to "turn off" the server part and still have a working app. This could be useful during development for example, so we can take advantage of the browser's developper and debugging tools which are quite powerful.

Let's use a config value to turn isomorphism on and off:

```javascript
// config.js
var config = {
  // ...
  DISABLE_ISOMORPHISM: process.env.DISABLE_ISOMORPHISM === 'true' || false
};
```

On the server, when isomorphism is off, we only need to send the serialized `config` in an empty HTML page (that contains a link to the JS app bundle), and the client will take care of the rest:

```javascript
// server.js
server.use(function(req, res) {
  if (config.DISABLE_ISOMORPHISM) {
    var exposedConfig = 'window.__CONFIG__=' + JSON.stringify(config) + ';';
    var html = injectIntoHtml({
      config: exposedConfig
    });
    res.send(html);
  } else {
    var state = {};
    // check session, fetch data, render app,
    // expose state & config, send html...
  }
});
```

The client now has more things to do for the first render. It needs to perform the tasks that were usually done by the server when isomorphism was turned on: create a new app state, read the auth token from the cookie, check if it's a valid session, match a route from the browser's URL location, fetch the data for that route, and finally render.

```javascript
// client.js
var config = window.__CONFIG__;
api.useConfig(config);

var state;
// first render
if (config.DISABLE_ISOMORPHISM) {
  state = {};
  var authToken = getCookie('authToken');
  api.checkSession(authToken, function(err, isValidToken) {
    if (isValidToken) {
      state.authToken = authToken;
    } else {
      clearCookie('authToken');
      state.authToken = null;
    }
    var route = matchPath(getCurrentPath());
    if (isAuthRequiredForRoute(route) && !isAuthenticated(state)) {
      replaceLocation(signInPath());
      route = matchPath(signInPath());
    }
    state.route = route;
    // render immediately with no data (can show a loading spinner)
    state.data = {};
    render();
    // fetch data in the background then re-render
    fetchData(route, function(err, data) {
      merge(state.data, data);
      render();
    });
  });
} else {
  state = window.__STATE__;
  render();
}

// add browser location change listener...
```

With this in place, the app should now function normally with isomorphism turned on or off. The first render will just take a little more time on the browser side in the latter case.

## Progressive enhancement

In the previous section we saw how to handle turning off the server-side rendering portion. What if we "turned off" the client-side portion? That would probably mean disabling JavaScript in the browser, and "going back" to the good old request/response cycle where every route is rendered on the server.

This is also known as "Progressive Enhancement". There are already [good articles](http://ponyfoo.com/articles/tagged/progressive-enhancement) that explain why/when you should pay attention to it, so I won't go into that here.

The bare-minimum of Progressive Enhancement is to be able to go from one route to another with JS turned off. This means **using actual link tags** (`<a>`) with their `href` attribute defined (this is also important for **accessibility**). When JS is enabled, you can **intercept the click event** on the `<a>` elements to prevent a page refresh and handle the routing on the client. A simple React component achieving this could look like:

```javascript
// Link.jsx
var Link = React.createClass({
  render: function() {
    return (
      <a {...this.props} onClick={this.handleClick}>{this.props.children}</a>
    );
  },
  handleClick: function(e) {
    e.preventDefault();
    navigateTo(this.props.href);
  }
});
```

This should cover most if not all of the *read* scenarios for the app. What about *writes*, i.e. creating and updating data? For that we need to make sure to capture user input in a `<form>`, and create **an additional route to handle the form's POST action** (we set this route in the form's `action` attribute). Just like previously, when JS is enabled we **intercept the submit event** on the `<form>` element, and handle the routing on the client.

```javascript
// NewContact.jsx
var NewContact = React.createClass({
  getInitialState: function() {
    return {working: false};
  },

  render: function() {
    <form action="/contacts/create" onSubmit={this.handleSubmit}>
      <input ref="name" name="name" placeholder="New contact" />
      <button type="submit" disabled={this.state.working}>Create</button>
      {this.state.working ? 'Working...' : null}
    </form>
  },

  handleSubmit: function(e) {
    e.preventDefault();
    this.setState({working: true});
    var name = this.refs.name.getDOMNode().value;
    navigateTo('/contact/create?name=' + urlEncode(name));
  }
});
```

Note that when JS is enabled on the client, we can **enhance the experience** by showing a "loading" indicator while we process the form.

For this to work properly, we will need to add **hooks to the routing logic**, specifically *before* the route change, so we can process the form data and then redirect to a "view" route when done. It could look like this in the `routes` declaration:

```javascript
// routes.js
var routes = {
  'contacts': {
    path: '/contacts'
  },
  'contact-new': {
    path: '/contact/new'
  },
  'contact-create': {
    path: '/contact/create',
    before: function(params, query, done) {
      createContact(query, function() {
        done({redirect: true, path: '/contacts'});
      });
    }
  },
  // ...
};
```

## Practical implementation

Now that we've explored what kind of concepts and problems arise with Isomorphic JavaScript apps, let's look at a more real-world implementation. This [GitHub repository](https://github.com/nicolashery/example-isomorphic-one) contains an example app built using [Yahoo's Fluxible](https://github.com/yahoo/fluxible) and [React Router](https://github.com/rackt/react-router).

The choice of libraries is quite arbitrary, and I'm sure another one would work quite as well.

Fluxible is a Flux implementation that was built with isomorphism in mind, and provides a solution to the "one Flux state for each request" problem. It does add some additional abstractions you need to learn (ex: different "contexts" for actions, stores, components), but you get used to it. They also tried to keep it modular (for instance I didn't have to use their router solution, and used React Router instead), and extensible (with "Fluxible plugins"). And actions have "done" callbacks, so we can use them on the server.

React Router is quite popular, and works well with "nested" route definitions. This allows you to declare data fetching logic at the component-level (instead of the route-level), and when the route changes the router automatically "walks the component render tree", so you can aggregate and fetch each component's required data. On the flip-side, the router owns the "route state", which means it will be separate from the rest of the app state (i.e. not in a Flux store). But maybe route state needs to be separate, and you can still "sync" it to a store if you want to.

With Fluxible, the `flux` "instance" (i.e. state) that we create on each request is called a `context`. The action creators, stores, and components get access to only part of the context: this ensures, for example, that only action creators can "dispatch" actions, but also means you have to use an additional abstraction.

We can also use the (undocumented) `React.withContext()` function (carefull not to use it to replace `props` though), so that every component has access to Fluxible's component `context` without having to pass it down as a prop.

The `config` values (not exactly "state", since they are set once for the whole app's lifecycle) ended up in Fluxible plugins, since they also have `dehydrate`/`rehydrate` methods. For example, I have an `apiPlugin` that holds the `API_HOST` config value, read from environment variables on the server, and sent to the client via the plugin's dehydrate method.

The routing logic is executed by React Router. Checking authentication and redirecting is done through the `willTransitionTo` static method (at the time of writing I had to use [a fork of React Router](https://github.com/bobpace/react-router/tree/transitionContext) that supports passing the `context` to that method).

The `fetchData` function takes as an argument the `routerState` that was passed to React Router's `router.run()` callback. Using `routerState.routes`,  an array of all handler components that will be rendered for that route, we can grab the `fetchData` static methods from components that have one, and run them in parallel.

Since React Router is separate from the Flux implementation, to be able to "dispatch routing actions" (for example, redirect after sign-in), I wrapped the router in a Fluxible `routerPlugin` so I can call `context.getRouter().transitionTo()` from inside an action creator. It might not be the most elegant way, but it works.

The first render on the client happens inside the `router.run()` like subsequent renders, so we want to be careful and flag it as such so we don't re-fetch all the data we already got from the server-side rendering.

Concerning progressive enhancement, specifically supporting posting forms with JS disabled, since React Router "handlers" are just components, we need a "fake" component to handle the form's "post" route (ex: `<form action="/contact/create">`), using the `willTransitionTo` static method to perform the API call.

If you're going through the example GitHub repository, a good place to start is to look at [server.js](https://github.com/nicolashery/example-isomorphic-one/blob/master/src/server/index.js) and [client.js](https://github.com/nicolashery/example-isomorphic-one/blob/master/src/client/index.js).

## Conclusion

Throughout my exploration and this post, I've tried to extract some general concepts related to Isomorphic JavaScript, that hopefully are common under some form or another accross different implementations. I've also given a small practical example using existing libraries (Fluxible, React Router).

There are of course other things to explore, for example: loading indicators on the client side, "optimistic" updates and the impact on progressive enhancement, handling API call errors, handling "not found" routes, setting/removing cookies, other data fetching strategies, etc.

My conclusions is that Isomorphic JavaScript is still young, and I expect different interesting approaches and libraries to appear in the future. There is also still ongoing debates on the pros & cons, and should/when you do it. I do find that it adds complexity to your app, and increases the "surface area for bugs". But it's definitely something we should pay attention to, and keep an eye on as it evolves.

It does give a web app the feeling of a more "original web"-like experience, versus a "packaged app" that you download. URLs are truly "first-class", and you probably end up spending more time thinking about them. Same goes for the stateless nature of URLs: the app becomes more a function of the URL (and auth information stored in a cookie), returning rendered data.

If you haven't already, give "Isomporphic JavaScript" a try, and do share your thoughts and findings.




































