---
layout: post
title: Using formal methods and TLA+ to model an ecommerce checkout system
---

## A first version of the model

Let's take a first shot at modelling this system. I'm not going to spend too much time explaining the syntax or the concepts of TLA+/PlusCal as Hillel Wayne's [Learn TLA+](https://learntla.com/) guide does it much better than I could. However, it should be easy enough to follow along even if you've never seen TLA+ before.

The first line of our model specification is just some imports of things we'll need:

```
EXTENDS Naturals, FiniteSets, Sequences
```

Next we define [constants](https://learntla.com/models/constants/), which you can think of parameters to the model. We'll need to give them specific values before running the model checker, but it will allow us to try different scenarios.

```
CONSTANTS
    NULL,
    NONEXISTENT, IN_PROGRESS, SUCCESSFUL, FAILED,
    PurchaseWorkers,
    PurchaseAttempts
```

The constants I chose to write in all-caps will be defined as ["model values"](https://learntla.com/models/model-values/), which is a special type of value different from primitives like strings and numbers: they are unique and only equal to themselves.

We'll use them to track the state of every Purchase in our system, which can be `NONEXISTENT` (if the user hasn't clicked "Purchase" on the Checkout page yet), `IN_PROGRESS`, `SUCCESSFUL`, or `FAILED` (ex: credit card was refused by the payment processor).

Since processing a Purchase can take a while, we anticipate we'll want multiple background workers for concurrency: if a first user is waiting on a Purchase to complete, a second user should be able to start a Purchase without waiting for the first user to finish. We'll represent that by the [set](https://learntla.com/tla/sets/) `PurchaseWorkers`, for example equal to `{w1, w2}` if we have 2 workers. We'll start with just a single worker `{w1}` and see how things change when we add more.

The final constant `PurchaseAttempts` defines the number of times the user tries to start a purchase. We want our system to be robust and handle possibly multiple calls to the HTTP API (for example if the user refreshes the page and is able to click the button again, or if the frontend has a bug allowing the user to click the button second time, etc.). We'll set it to `1` for now, and see how things change if we increase it.

Next we define a series of variables that will represent the state of our system:

```
(* --algorithm purchase

variables
    Purchases = 1..PurchaseAttempts,
    PurchaseStates = [p \in Purchases |->  NONEXISTENT],
    PurchaseQueue = <<>>,
    CountRequests = 0,
    AllRequests = Cardinality(Purchases);
```

(Note: The `--algorithm` here just represents the beginning of the more programmer-friendly PlusCal syntax, which will get translated to TLA+ by the IDE.)

The `Purchases` variable is a set that identifies all current and future purchases in the system (ex: equal to `{1}`, or `{1, 2}`, depending on the value of `PurchaseAttempts`).

With `PurchaseStates`, I use a [function](https://learntla.com/tla/functions/) (the name is a bit misleading, think of it more as a hash map or dictionary) to track the state of each Purchase.

The `PurchaseQueue` variable is a [tuple](https://learntla.com/tla/tuples/) (you can think of it as a list), that will be used to communicate between the two processes of our system: the HTTP API and the background workers.

I'll skip over `CountRequests` and `AllRequests`: they are plumbing used to make sure the model terminates, and are less important to our problem at hand.

Next we define some [operators](https://learntla.com/tla/operators/) (you can think of them as functions).

```
define
    NoDuplicatePurchases ==
        Cardinality({p \in Purchases : PurchaseStates[p] = SUCCESSFUL}) <= 1

    StopWorker == CountRequests = AllRequests /\ Len(PurchaseQueue) = 0
end define;
```

The important one here is `NoDuplicatePurchases`. It is an **invariant** of our system, and we'll use the power of the model checker to make sure it holds under different scenarios. What it checks is that of all the Purchases attempted by the user for her Cart, only one of them must be successful. If not, that could mean that we charged the user twice, and that she'll receive her items twice!

I'll skip over the `StopWorker` operator for the same reason as earlier, it is plumbing used to make sure the model terminates.

Next we model the different [processes](https://learntla.com/concurrency/processes/) that make up our system.
